[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Humanity has suffered
through a number of cataclysms
and mass extinctions.
But according to Paul Wallis, we
had help pulling ourselves out
of it.
Specifically, we're
talking about visitors
from other planets or realms
that helped us get on our feet
and start over again.
At this time,
we're going through
catastrophic social and
governmental upheaval
throughout the
world, leaving many
of the vulnerable and
displaced unattended to.
So where are our helpers now?
We'll get to all of that.
Paul, it's so good
to see you again.
>>PAUL WALLIS: Good day, Regina.
It's great to be back with you.
>>REGINA: I love it.
Good day.
You're just about
over your jet lag.
Which province do
you live in again?
>>PAUL: Queensland, Australia.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PAUL: So it's a two-day
journey to get here.
>>REGINA: I know.
And two days to get
over the jet lag.
>>PAUL: That's it.
>>REGINA: Thank you so much
for going to all the trouble.
But this is a
wonderful conversation.
You have a new book out
called The Eden Enigma.
And you're digging
deeper into the evidence
of these cultures who have
been here both to help humanity
and not so much.
And we're looking at some
of the evidence for this.
So let's start in--
First of all, this
gets into a subject.
You and Father Sean Olaire and I
had a conversation at one point.
The three of us were
talking about the nature
of good and evil.
And that's not so easy.
That's not an easy
topic to take on.
But in a really short
summary, just to bring people
into this conversation,
tell us how you ended up
kind of articulating the notion
of good and evil on this planet.
>>PAUL: Well, where I go
to is Plato, who I find
really helpful on this topic.
And I get a notion of
what good and evil means
from Plato's explanation
of who we are,
where we all came from,
how everything began.
I love Plato because
he applies logic
to things we can all observe,
and then step by step,
he gets to these incredible,
far reaching conclusions.
And one of his conclusions
is that before the material
universe existed, there was a
unified field of consciousness,
to use modern language
on it, and that
preceded all matter or energy,
time, the unified field
of human consciousness.
And he said the
material universe
came into being so that that
consciousness could experience
itself and have experiences.
And so it really
sets up a question,
can we do unified
consciousness as a material
realm of separate entities
exercising free choice?
And everything that answers
yes, yes, we can to that
question we call good.
And if we think, what does
unified consciousness look like?
Well, in a material universe,
that's order, that's harmony.
Can we do it?
If the answer is yes,
we call that good.
Everything that answers
no to that question,
we call that bad,
we call that evil.
And that's my start point for
understanding good and evil.
>>REGINA: OK.
That's very good.
That's a good place to start
at, because really, that's
a question facing a lot of
us right at this moment.
Your new book landed
you in Turkey,
where you're finding
further evidence.
And this is the
hot spot right now.
Some of the other
Tepes are coming out.
People are writing books
on some of their findings.
You had your own findings.
You were surprised
because of them.
Some of them were
really quite subtle
and they could have been
overlooked quite easily.
So let's take this
story now to Turkey
and the story of
some of the beings
who had been there before.
I think their names
are the Haldi.
>>PAUL: That's right.
So the group is the Tengri
and if you read historians
and archaeologists, they will
say the Tengri were the gods
of the Urartian people who
lived in Turkey 3,000 years ago.
But the problem is, as soon
as we translate their stories
and use the word gods,
we've distorted it,
because that's not what
Tengri really means.
And so Haldi and his friends,
you listen to the stories,
read the inscriptions,
look at the carvings,
the stories that
emerge are not of gods
as in supernatural,
transcendent, infinite, probably
imagined beings, because
that's what gods means to us.
They're actually talking
about advanced beings who
lived with their ancestors
for a while in the past
and helped them out.
And they didn't worship them.
They remember them with
love and gratitude.
They honor them in their
stories and inscriptions,
but they didn't worship them.
>>REGINA: That means they
probably did not fear them.
>>PAUL: No, they
didn't fear them.
They were thankful
for their presence.
They saw it as a golden age when
they lived in their presence.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
So that would have been around
the time in Egypt, not far away,
of the 18th dynasty, and there
was a lot of very high thinking
at that time.
>>PAUL: Well, these stories
were told 3,000 years ago,
but they're referring back--
>>REGINA: Back further when
they were originally there.
>>PAUL: Much further.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PAUL: And what
interested me as I
began getting into their stories
was that these beings had
very finite powers.
So they weren't godlike.
They had advanced capabilities,
but there were some limits
on what they could do.
And so we've got beings called
Haldi, Arubani, Irmusini,
Siuini, Teishebaini.
And they are all honored
with having altered
the environment,
introduced agriculture,
but they weren't
supernatural or mighty.
They weren't able to prevent the
chaos that their ancestors had
to live through, but they were
able to come alongside them
as they emerged from the
chaos and support them
in rebuilding civilization.
And that's really the heart
of the Urartian stories.
>>REGINA: Oh, goodness.
And that had happened before.
I mean, with the various
destructions of Atlantis
and final destruction
of Atlantis,
it was really kind of rebooting.
Fortunately, some
of that knowledge
from the people of Atlantis
had been taken off and moved
through the Mayan culture
and over into Europe
and into Egypt and Africa.
But they had help, too.
It wasn't just the people
taking some of the legends.
We needed help rebuilding.
>>PAUL: Exactly.
And those stories of helpful
intervention, they're global.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PAUL: There are versions
all around the world,
and especially around the
advent of agriculture.
So if you go to
Zulu story, you'll
hear about Mbaba Mwana Waresa,
who introduces wheat and beer.
Good for her.
And then you've got
Itzamna in the Mayan
culture, who introduced
particular crops to the Mayan
people.
The Babylonian story talks
about Oannes, an Upkallu,
introducing agriculture
and city building.
All around the world.
In Australia, there's
a fascinating example.
Up at the top end in
the Northern territory,
there's a people group
called the Yolngu people.
And Aboriginal Australians
are renowned for knowing
how to live in balance
with the environment,
knowing about the land, knowing
everything about the flora
and fauna, yet they tell
a story of their ancestors
not having any of those skills.
They didn't know
which plants were
good to eat, which had to be
avoided, what animals you could
hunt and eat, which you
couldn't, how to fish.
And the story they tell
is that their elders,
not knowing any of
this, had to learn it
from non-human beings who
were living in the region
at that time, who they
called the Mimih people,
or the Mimih spirits.
And when they use
the word spirits,
all that means is they could
turn up and leave by means
they didn't understand.
That's what that word means.
And it was the Mimih who taught
them the dance of the hunt,
and the dance of fishing,
and the dance of the harvest.
And so all around
the world, we have
stories like this where
humanity was in a situation
where survival was uncertain,
and then these non-human others
appear to help us
through that moment,
give us an education so that
we can re-establish ourselves
in some kind of
change that we've
gone through, which I
believe was cataclysm,
an environmental cataclysm.
And it echoes all
around the world.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So going back to our first topic
of the nature of good and evil,
as you perceive
through Plato, this
would constitute good in that
these beings came any time--
it seems to me, I've watched--
I mean, just in my
lifetime I've watched.
And whenever there is
supposedly a group of beings,
whether they're
off planet or not,
or humans that demand fealty,
that say, I'm the way,
I'm the only one,
only I can do this
and there's retribution
if you don't worship them,
I've always perceived
that as evil.
>>PAUL: Yes.
>>REGINA: Just even as a
little kid, my own perception
of that was even in the Bible.
I had a very different
view of the Bible at five
than I should have.
>>PAUL: Good for you.
>>REGINA: I questioned
everything back then,
and I thought, no, that's evil.
You don't make people do
those kinds of things.
So what you're talking
about is the very force
of good from these
visitors that came
to help us establish,
not demand,
not creating fear
and not demanding
we worship them and not
having any kind of retribution
if we didn't do what they said.
>>PAUL: That's
absolutely correct.
And especially in
the Urartian story,
they loved the Tengri
who lived among them.
They were thankful for the
education they received.
They were taught how to live in
balance with the environment,
how to help the environment.
So you've got the environment,
the people, the visitors,
and they are doing intelligence
and harmony together.
So it is a good story.
>>REGINA: It is.
I love it.
And so we'll continue on
in Turkey in a moment.
But we're kind of
switching back and forth
because the times we're in are
these chaotic, urgent times
and we have forgotten our
connection with the land.
We've forgotten.
Now, if all of a sudden we
had some kind of power grid
outage or whatever
and you couldn't
rely on the normal
things, streams
of goods that we get
in life, most of us
wouldn't have a clue as
how to live with the land,
or from the land, or
how the land could help,
what it has to offer that we
could heal ourselves with.
We have no clue anymore.
>>PAUL: Yes, that's correct.
And I think we forget, our
civilization depends on farming,
same as it always has.
And when I think of how
my grandparents lived,
how they lived through
the Depression,
they lived through it because
they were kind of farmers too.
They grew a lot of
food of their own.
They exchanged it
with their neighbors.
That's how they thrived
in very difficult times.
And I think if you live
in a city or a suburb
and you get all your food from
the supermarket, you can forget.
We depend on the land,
we depend on our farmers,
we depend on the weather.
It can all be a bit precarious,
and we easily forget.
>>REGINA: We do.
And not to say nothing
of all the healing herbs.
Herbs.
We call them herbs.
I'm talking to you,
I'm calling it herbs.
>>PAUL: Yes.
Understood.
>>REGINA: Healing
herbs-- herbs--
healing that we have
available to us.
And other than the rare
person here or there
who has taken the
time to study, we've
forgotten that we have a
cornucopia of healing plants
all around us as well that
we've forgotten all about.
>>PAUL: We do.
I was saying to
someone just yesterday,
if I could have my gran back
for a week and take notes,
I would have a lot
more alternative
to pills for when I have my
various ailments or whatever.
My gran had all sorts
of natural responses
to getting stung by something,
injured by something,
having a headache, an upset
tummy, whatever it is.
And she wasn't unusual.
That was just normal
knowledge two generations ago.
And yet we've become
so detached from it.
>>REGINA: That is very true.
And it doesn't really
matter who I'm talking to.
Every seer, sayer,
channeler or psychic,
they're all saying the same
thing, that the answer here now
is we must return to the land.
I'm thinking, well,
we're not going to have
that kind of cataclysm, are we?
But nonetheless, it creates
that balance in our field.
Go ahead.
>>PAUL: It does.
And you say return to
the land, which sounds
like some huge seismic change.
But for a lot of
people, all that means
is reconnecting
with your backyard.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Sitting under a tree,
appreciating the tree,
talking to the tree.
>>PAUL: Yes.
And even in a
small backyard, you
can produce all kinds of
foods and healing plants.
I have a friend who I mentioned
in one of my books called Cam.
And he's a guardian of
traditional Hawaiian knowledge,
and his belief is very strong.
And you hear this in Shamanic
teaching around the world
that everything you need grows
in your immediate environment,
and you should expect to
find what you need there.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Beautiful.
OK.
Well, now we're going to
head on back to Turkey.
And Anatolia, the reinvention
of agriculture in Anatolia,
you said that this was
particularly significant.
Why?
>>PAUL: Well, two reasons.
First of all, it's essential
that unless you have agriculture
that can cultivate
crops, you will not
have the security to settle.
You will not have
the surpluses that
mean you can have a
specialized society.
Once you have a
specialized society,
you can begin to build a city.
>>REGINA: And then
you can trade.
>>PAUL: Then you can trade.
So before civilization
begins to build,
you need farming to happen.
And there are many
vectors pointing
to Anatolia as the place where
farming as we know it began.
And so I learned this through
my study of ancient texts,
but also contemporary science.
So it was 1998, I think, that a
team went into Southeast Turkey
to a place called Kara Dağ.
It was led by Manfred Hoyne.
And he took a team from
the University of Norway
in Ås and the Max Planck
Institute in Cologne, Germany,
and they identified what
appears to be the first farm,
the first known farm.
And there in that place, very
locally, a family or tribe
learned how to
adapt 11 naturally
occurring plants so that they
could be cultivated as crops.
This is a huge thing because
it involves gene manipulation
to do that.
So in Australia, I used
to live on the farm
where federation
wheat was invented.
So this was the
strain of wheat that
was created that could grow
in Australia so that we could
build big cities in Australia.
Up until that point, we'd
imported wheat from Europe,
and we couldn't get it to
grow and produce harvests
because the environment
was so different.
William Farrer, with all
the benefits of 19th century
science, took 20 years to work
out how to change European wheat
into Federation wheat.
All of a sudden, we can
grow our own harvests,
we can sustain
denser populations,
we can build the cities up.
It took him 20 years.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>PAUL: This family in
Turkey, 10,000 years ago,
did it 11 times over and
invented animal husbandry.
>>REGINA: So they might have
had a little bit of help.
>>PAUL: They may have
had a little help.
>>REGINA: Did you call
it Federation wheat?
>>PAUL: That's right.
>>REGINA: OK.
I'm just going off
topic for a minute here.
So in America, we have very high
levels of gluten intolerance,
and our red wheat has
high gluten content,
where the white wheat
of Europe does not.
So people say, oh,
I went on vacation,
I ate the baguettes in France
and focaccia, I had no problems.
What is your
Federation wheat like?
Do you know if it's high
or low gluten content?
>>PAUL: I'm not sure.
I only eat sourdough.
>>REGINA: Oh, I love that.
Me too.
>>PAUL: You're probably
asking the wrong person.
>>REGINA: All right.
I'm just curious.
Sour does starts
breaking down the gluten.
Absolutely.
OK.
So let's get back
on track again.
You said that some of
these bits of evidence
were very obvious that
you found in Turkey.
Some not so much.
So what were some
of the surprises
that you ran into
while you were there?
>>PAUL: Well, when
I went, I knew
that I would hear stories of
this reinvention of agriculture.
I knew I would hear stories
of a reboot of civilization
because there are so many
narrative traditions that point
to Anatolia, what
was ancient Armenia.
So you've got the
Noah story in Genesis
that says it was here in Ararat
that his boat ran aground,
and then he planted the first
vineyard and society got
going again.
You've got the Sumerian story of
Ziusudra, the Babylonian story
of Ziusudra.
He landed there.
He rebooted society there.
Greek, Roman writers
point there and say,
that's where the Iron Age began.
Go to the 1200s.
Snorri Sturluson.
He's the person through whom we
know all the Viking God stories.
He said it was from there,
Hay's land, ancient Armenia
that advanced culture
migrated through the Balkans,
into Northwest Europe,
into Scandinavia,
with modern capabilities in
terms of agriculture and city
building.
So you've got all these
vectors pointing there.
So I fully expected
the reboot story.
But what surprised me was the
detail of the Urartian story,
because they talked about
where the helpers came from
and exactly what they did
to help us post cataclysm
to get agriculture going.
And it goes into
very great detail,
and they tell a story
of hand pollination
and cross pollination.
And these are the
symbols that they carved.
>>REGINA: By the humans?
>>PAUL: Being taught by
the Tengri how to do it.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Without bees doing
the pollination.
>>PAUL: Exactly.
So you see that
and you think, oh,
why are they having to do that?
The only reason you
have to hand pollinate
is if by some catastrophe--
>>REGINA: There you bees.
>>PAUL: --you've got no
bees, got no flying insects.
>>REGINA: Fascinating.
>>PAUL: So embedded
in that story
is environmental
cataclysm, visitors coming,
teaching hand pollination.
This means they brought
plants from elsewhere.
They're going to
create new strains,
and they're teaching
the people how to do it.
This is the central story
that keeps repeating.
And I realized as I
kept looking at this
that what they were showing
me was lighting the blue touch
paper of civilization.
That's the significance
of hand pollination.
>>REGINA: What do you mean
lighting the blue touch paper?
>>PAUL: Because you can't have
civilization without agriculture
and you can't have
agriculture without plants
that can thrive,
and to get to that,
you need the hand
pollination, and that's
what these Tengri were
teaching the people.
>>REGINA: Wow.
That has a lot of implications,
especially as around the planet
right now.
We have a reduction in
certain bee populations.
>>PAUL: Exactly.
So I talk about
the Silent Spring.
So Rachel Carson in 1962
warned that this would happen,
that if we continued to
use some of the chemicals
we were using in
farming at that time,
we could have a
silent spring, which
means you've got no insects
to do the pollinating,
you've got no birds.
The ecosystem begins
to break down.
You're now eating poisoned food
because of these chemicals.
And the Urartian
story says, this
happened before, but not because
of petrochemicals, but because
of an Ice Age.
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, that gives us
some food for thought.
OK.
Thank you for that.
So now we're going to move on
to the seal that was found--
was it-- the Southern
Wall of Temple Mount.
>>PAUL: Yes.
>>REGINA: What was
this all about?
>>PAUL: Oh, this
was so exciting.
This was just last year.
While I was writing The
Eden Enigma, this happened.
The seal was discovered,
the seal of Yeho'azar.
And the significance of it is
when we read the Bible today,
we're reading a
story of monotheism.
When we think of Judaism, we
think of monotheistic religion.
But there was a time when
Judaism was not that.
So academics will say it
used to be polytheistic.
I would say near miss.
It was actually a
canon of paleocontact.
The ancestors of
the Jewish people
commemorated a whole
range of beings,
just like the Urartians did, who
had visited them in the past,
helped them in the past,
some of them exploited them
in the past, some of them--
all these beings washing
around in the biblical text.
And then there was
a great reform.
From the eighth to sixth century
BCE, the stories were retold.
The Bible as we know
it was put together.
There was a ritual reform,
various priesthoods shut down,
temples demolished, and
Judaism was pared down
to Yahwist monotheism.
But this seal comes from a
time before that had happened.
And so it belonged
to a Jewish leader
who would use the seal to
solemnize his documents
and seal his letters.
And the image on it is of an
Assyrian genie, or an Assyrian
God, or a Tengri,
to use that word.
And he saw no problem
with using that image.
He saw no conflict between
that and his Judaism
because this was
before the reform
when the Jewish
people understood
that their Elohim,
their advanced beings
were all part of this
wider family of beings
whose stories were told in
every culture around the world.
So the seal is a little
window into that ancient time
before all the modern
boundaries of religion
that we think of today
when people remembered
what the Elohim looked like,
what the Anunnaki looked like,
and that was the
image that he used.
>>REGINA: That's fascinating.
>>PAUL: It was a time
when people remembered
what the gods looked like.
>>REGINA: So you said, I
believe it was the sixth to--
>>PAUL: Eighth to
sixth century BCE.
>>REGINA: --where the
structure of the gods
was narrowed down to essentially
Yahweh in the Hebrew faith.
>>PAUL: That's right.
>>REGINA: And then it was
narrowed down and around
the third--
no, no.
It would have been
the 13th century BCE.
In Egypt, it was narrowed
down to the monotheism
of one god that was the sun.
So that had already
happened in Egypt,
but it wasn't an ET per se, or
it wasn't an entity with a face.
It was the sun itself,
and then the hierarchy
of the dimensions of the sun.
>>PAUL: The reforms
in the Jewish faith
had a huge political
implication,
just as they did in Egypt.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
It went down badly.
>>PAUL: But it was kind
of the other way around
for Judaism because it was a
centralizing of power where
you had one God, one king, one
high priest, one temple, all
the tithes going
to that one place.
And it was part of
achieving an easily governed
theocratic society.
That's what they created.
>>REGINA: OK.
So now let's go to--
we're going to
go-- because we're
talking about both controlling
and opportunistic gods
and we're talking about those
who came to assist humanity.
So one of the stories
that you look into it
happened in the Hawaiian
culture, the Ahumanu.
Let's go there now.
>>PAUL: The story of the arrival
of the Mo'o, the dragons,
and the Ahumanu in
the Hawaiian stories
is basically a
story of invasion.
It's a very ancient
story in which
these beings come and colonize
the lands of their ancestors.
So all traditional ownership
of the land is now irrelevant.
The land belongs to
the Mo'o, the Ahumanu,
and it is divided up so that
the place can be managed.
So now people,
just to live, have
to pay rent to the higher
ups just to live on the land.
And you can create
scarcity, dependence,
and one way in
which they did this
was introduce a money system.
So now you need the
money to pay the rents.
So instead of working for
yourself or your community,
you're working for money and the
money is issued by the invaders.
So you're working
for the invaders.
And then the money you're paid
is devalued year after year.
So just to maintain
your standard of living,
you're going to
work ever harder.
>>REGINA: That sounds
familiar right now.
>>PAUL: It sounds familiar.
It's an ancient, ancient story,
but when I heard that story,
I thought, oh my goodness,
I understand this world.
This is the world we live in.
And I think a lot
of the time when
we think about ancient
ancestral story,
we think it's a
story about the past.
It's really a lens
to help us understand
the world in which we live.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And so we're talking about
usurious entities that
are trying to create structure
and order where they control
and they gain.
That's what we have
today, basically.
And so that's often
called-- throughout history,
they're called
the-- and certainly
now, these people are
called the elite, which
I take great exception to.
It just burns me when I hear
people calling them the elite
because they're bottom feeders.
They're feeding off of
the efforts and energy
of good people.
That's a bottom feeder.
Why did we start calling them
the elite instead of predators?
They're predators.
>>PAUL: Well, I think
because the invaders become
the department of education, and
they call themselves the elite.
I would give the story of
Ghana as an example of this
because this is my family story.
So my family on my father's
father's side is Ghanaian.
From the 1820s on until 1950,
Britain sort of took control
of Ghana.
And the way it was framed--
obviously, they went in because
they had a lot of weaponry
and they said, we can defend
you against your enemies.
Oh, thank you, says
Ghana, and bit by bit
discovers the British are
there for the British,
not for the Ghanaians.
But the story runs that
obviously, the British
are superior, they are
more sophisticated,
they're running
the show, they're
running the legal system,
they're running the banks,
they're running the
schools and if you
want to progress
in British Ghana,
then start dressing
British, start speaking
the Queen's English.
And a lot of Ghanaian
people for a long time
bought into that,
where they were
made to feel inferior and
regard the British as the elite
because that was the
story the British told.
You can look at any
invasion all over the world.
It's the same
pattern everywhere.
>>REGINA: I think we need to
take our power back and stop
calling these usurious
factions the elite.
They're not.
They're users and controllers.
>>PAUL: I agree.
>>REGINA: They're predators.
>>PAUL: A great
shortcut to doing
that is Jim Henson's movie.
>>REGINA: Tell us.
>>PAUL: The Dark Crystal,
when I watched this movie--
>>REGINA: You're
talking about Muppets?
>>PAUL: Yeah.
It is Muppets.
And so I thought, oh,
this is a fun kids movie.
I like Muppets.
And the story runs that this
land has been invaded and taken
over by very long
lived beings who
were ugly bird people,
very much like the Ahumanu
in the Hawaiian story.
And they predate upon the
innocent, childlike gelflings.
And they'll often capture
them, terrorize them,
and then they'll
extract the essence
of the gelflings, which
they feed on so they
can carry on living long.
Well, I watched this as a
kids movie long time ago.
Now I'm realizing that's
actually our world.
>>REGINA: Jim Henson
was on to something.
>>PAUL: He's telling us
the truth about our world.
But when you see it that way
and you see the silly ugly bird
people, you wouldn't
call them elite.
You'd say they were
the evil beings.
Watch that movie and
it will just refresh.
You will never talk
about the elite
again after you've
watched The Dark Crystal.
>>REGINA: OK.
I love it.
The Dark Crystal, Jim Henson.
>>PAUL: We'll call
them the bird people.
>>REGINA: The bird people.
OK.
Well, I'll probably still
call them bottom feeders
or predators, but--
>>PAUL: Fair enough.
>>REGINA: OK.
So right now, as the structures
and our government, which all
governments--
I mean, the time is up.
The old post-industrial
era structures
need to fall down now because
they've outlived their function
and usefulness, and too many
people were used as fodder.
It really was in this
elite power structure
that these systems
were designed,
including our educational
systems, our medical systems.
So I think we're all
on the same page.
These systems have to
transform, and it's
going to happen probably
in a very chaotic way.
We're seeing it already.
OK.
So you tell a
story, and I believe
it was in your previous
book, the Invasion of Eden,
is that correct?
>>PAUL: Yes.
>>REGINA: --about the ancient
city and history of-- it's
called Val Gardena?
>>PAUL: Oh, yes.
>>REGINA: Val Gardena in Italy.
And I was fascinated by that.
So tell us a little bit
about what happened there
and why that's at all
relevant in today's world,
where we're going
through this rapid change
and destruction of systems
so that we can transform.
>>PAUL: It's an amazing story.
When I went there, I
was on a skiing holiday.
And it was a present
from a friend of mine.
He realized I needed some stress
relief, I needed a holiday.
Very generously invited
me out to this place,
the town of Ortisei, in
the District of Val Gardena
in the Italian Tyrol.
Absolutely beautiful place.
As I walked around
the streets, I
worked out, first of all,
the language spoken there
isn't Italian, it's German.
But then, looking on the
street signs and the signage
at the shops, there
were three languages--
German, Italian, and
this other language.
I didn't know what
it was, but somehow I
could work out what it meant,
and I couldn't work out
how I could do that.
>>REGINA: Well, let's
tell everybody first,
you speak a number of languages.
You're a linguist.
You've had to do a lot of this
in biblical interpretations
and far beyond.
>>PAUL: Yes.
>>REGINA: You speak something
like six languages, as I recall.
>>PAUL: Something like that.
I need to work on them to get
fluent, but they're all there.
>>REGINA: They're all there.
>>PAUL: Somewhere in brain.
>>REGINA: So you're
facile with languages.
So let's go ahead.
>>PAUL: That's right.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PAUL: But I was
still thinking,
how do I know what
those words mean?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PAUL: And then my
guide, Jana said, Paul,
did you do Latin at school?
And I said, yes, three
painful years of Latin.
She said, that's why you
can read those signs,
because the local
language is Ladin.
>>REGINA: Ladin.
>>PAUL: Ladin with a D.
It's the closest living
descendant of Latin.
And the reason we speak that
here is that 2000 years ago,
nearly, the Roman
army was installed
here, a whole division.
The bulk of the
local population was
the Roman army speaking Latin.
And then, of course, Rome
moved its capital East.
This happened after a
long time of dis-investing
in its Western territories.
And so what that meant was
public service was gutted,
which might sound familiar.
They stopped investing
in the roads.
They stopped building
amphitheaters.
People were being taxed and
getting no benefit from it.
And then finally,
the capital moves
and then they recall the Army.
So the Army, almost the whole
population of this district,
were being told now have
to move to Constantinople
and continue serving
this empire that
couldn't care less about you.
You'll be living in
a foreign country
and you'll thank us for it.
And the local population of Val
Gardena said, we're not going.
>>REGINA: And they were gutted.
The services were gutted, but
they said, we're staying here.
>>PAUL: We're staying here,
because it is a beautiful place
and we have no interest
in Constantinople,
and we think we can carry on
living here, serving each other.
Instead of siphoning
all our wealth
to Rome and now
to Constantinople,
we will farm for each other.
We will make and sell
things to each other.
We will become a
self-sufficient community.
We can trade with our neighbors.
We'll make a go of it.
And they did and that's why
all this time later, they're
still living there, still
speaking Latin, basically.
>>REGINA: I love it.
And it's still a
thriving community?
>>PAUL: Oh, still a
thriving community.
>>REGINA: And my
understanding is that they
invested in everything.
Arts.
They supported every
expression of their citizenry,
which we don't do anymore.
>>PAUL: And now they've got
tourism and skiing as well.
So they did well out
of that decision.
But I find it an inspiring
story because we're
in a period where our
empires are not serving us,
where our tax dollars
are being taken
and we're not
being looked after.
And we may need to discover more
local expressions of economy
and more local expressions of
community than we have before.
And I think we
can still do that.
In a sense, it doesn't matter
what government is doing.
Local communities
still exist and we
can look after each other.
And I'll give a
couple of examples.
>>REGINA: Please
do, because this
is something that's taking
hold on a grassroots level
and popping up in little
communities around the world.
Just starting though.
>>PAUL: Yes.
So take farms.
We were talking before about
taking our farms for granted.
A lot of our farms are very
dependent on the big structures
of supermarkets,
and often that's
multinational corporations.
And the supermarkets
can in an instant say,
we don't want your
harvest anymore,
or we'll pay half of
what we paid last year.
And that's a disaster.
This isn't a panacea, it
won't work for every farm,
but there are places--
I know this has happened
in the United States,
and it's happened in Australia,
where a farmer has found itself
in that kind of trouble,
or a network of farms,
and so the local towns then
become their customers.
And there are places where
you can pay your farm a fixed
amount of money every
week, and every week you
get a food package from them.
And it'll be a
different food package.
>>REGINA: Community-supported
agriculture
I think it's called
in California.
CSAs.
>>PAUL: So we've gone back to an
older pattern, a smaller scale
economy where the town is
the customer of the farm
and we support each other and
we can make a go of it together.
So we can do that on that level.
And I think, again, we shouldn't
see it as a retrograde step.
That's a very
wonderful and human way
of living and
appreciating one another.
It's a new expression
of harmony.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
We already know that
big agriculture--
some people can't afford
to buy organic food
because it's not equal
here in the United States.
It's not like what
Prince Charles in the day
did to equalize the prices
of organic and non-organic
in England.
That was one of his
great contributions.
We don't have that
in the United States.
So you have to have a
little higher income
to be able to afford a
healthy, organic diet.
So you're forced
into these foods
where they've used
these awful chemicals.
So I see it as a huge upgrade
if that started breaking down.
>>PAUL: It is an upgrade because
you will get cleaner food.
And of course, some farms get
into trouble in the States
if they're not growing GM crops.
But that's not necessarily
what the local towns want.
They're very happy
to eat organic.
And there are other towns
where the farming is happening
at a micro level, where
you've got networks of homes
with backyards-- so it's
not a rural environment,
but they're all using
their backyards,
getting together to coordinate
who's going to grow what,
and then they share
it and they thrive.
>>REGINA: And then times past.
100 years ago,
even in Paris, they
would grow their
vegetables on their roofs
and on their tiny
little balconies.
There's a way to do this.
So we don't have to be beholden
to that big Ag industry, which
I'll be very happy to see
it disrupted personally
in that way.
I've had so much fun talking
with you about all this.
We're almost out of time.
So going back now to
the visitors who have
helped-- the good visitors,
not the controlling ones.
They've left little
kind of breadcrumbs
of evidence of how we can
reach out and how we can--
forget governmental disclosure.
It's already happened, really.
So they've left some
breadcrumbs of how
we can reach out and
begin communicating
on a more cosmic level.
You found evidence that they
have left ways to engage.
>>PAUL: What I saw
the Urartians doing,
they had three
modalities, I believe,
that they used to try
and achieve communication
with advanced
beings, with Tengri.
One was e-fields.
So their special
sites, where they
built their sanctuaries were on
dense magnetic rock, and then
there would be water
flowing over that rock.
And human bodies
feel different when
you stand in an e-field
that's created that way.
You just feel more alert.
You feel more awake.
You're heightened
in some kind of way.
And then they created
phenomena of light.
And I actually think this
is because they remember--
they tell the stories in their
inscriptions of the Tengri
coming and going
in beams of light.
And I think it's a memory
of artificial lighting,
of doors being opened
and then the Tengri
come out of this bright light
and then they go back into it.
So the Urartians thought,
hey, ho, we need that.
So they created sanctuaries
facing from west to east.
And at one place
in particular, all
encased in alabaster so that
it absolutely glows with light.
They're decorated in gold leaf.
So they're experiencing
a light phenomenon.
And they would have found you
feel differently when you're
surrounded by a light that way.
It also is elevating.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PAUL: And then
archeologists would
talk about libation offerings.
What I think was really
happening is they had a drink.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PAUL: A special
drink that they
used to alter their
state of consciousness.
All their neighbors did this.
The Greeks did it with
Kykeon, the Persians did it,
the Egyptians did it,
the Indians did it.
So they're doing these
things and finding
they're experiencing
an altered state
and they're having
contact experiences.
So that's what I found there.
>>REGINA: It's interesting
because that is happening
in much greater numbers now--
>>PAUL: Yes.
>>REGINA: --with or
without the drink.
And I just find it
interesting that in all
these ancient cultures, really
high priority was wine and beer.
So we must have needed to
self-soothe from the beginning.
>>PAUL: I think that's
part of the picture too.
>>REGINA: But no, this
is really interesting,
though, because the contact
that we're talking about,
the help we're looking
for is all around us.
It's always speaking to
us and calling to us.
>>PAUL: And at a personal
one-on-one level.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PAUL: And I find in
the coaching space,
I'm hearing from
people who might not
be using any of those modalities
and yet they will tell me,
I'm beginning to
believe I've got
an invisible team of helpers.
I keep getting these thoughts
and ideas and these nudges.
And it's not what they've been
taught through their religion.
It's not what they've
learned at school.
They're just beginning to
recognize what's happening.
I find that really encouraging
because we might wonder what
contact is going on
behind closed doors,
but contact is everywhere.
>>REGINA: Contact is everywhere.
That is contact.
I couldn't agree with you more.
It's lovely to hear that the
people that you're coaching
are experiencing this
individually, on their own,
with no training.
It's just happening.
>>PAUL: Yes.
And they're recognizing
it for what it is.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Oh my gosh.
OK.
Just any final thought
before we say goodbye?
We're out of time.
>>PAUL: I'm going to go
back to Plato because I've
learned so much from him.
And he just speaks about our
purpose here in this life.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PAUL: And his view is
that we as material beings
are here to have experiences,
and we should enjoy having them.
And if we can just
learn to shake off
our heavier emotions, by which
he meant things like anger,
rage, resentment,
unforgiveness, fear, anxiety,
if you can find a way to
shake those off, he says,
you'll have better experiences.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
Hear, hear.
>>PAUL: So I think if we're
intentional in that way
and decide, well,
this is the emotion
I want to spend today
in, this is what
I want to inject into my
connections with people,
it will always be
reflected back.
You'll have a better day.
You'll have a better experience.
So I love that as a guide.
>>REGINA: I love it
too, because in spite
of any kind of challenges
or trials or chaos going on,
this is a beautiful,
stunning planet.
There's so much that we can
engage with still moment
to moment, every single day.
>>PAUL: And can I quickly
say that we seem to be going
into a time of chaos, but a
time will come when we will need
people who are healthy, happy,
imaginative, compassionate--
>>REGINA: Yes.
Relaxed
>>PAUL: --to respond, relaxed,
and create better ways forward.
We need to make sure
that we're those people.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Very good point,
to be able to stay
centered and enjoy your
life through these times.
Conscious decisions is where
it's at while you enjoy it all.
>>PAUL: Exactly.
>>REGINA: I love it.
Thank you so much, Paul.
It's so good seeing you again.
>>PAUL: It's been a pleasure.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: So you can pick
up a copy of The Eden Enigma
at major booksellers.
You can also learn a lot
more about Paul's work
by going to
paulanthonywallace.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]